Disposition
================
Lia Baumann
2024-04-17

## Topic

“Genetic structure and long-term genetic diversity assessment of
Burgundy truffle populations in central Europe”

## Research question(s) and hypotheses

Prelim.: What is the population structure of the truffles? Are MLGs
perennial? Differences between or within populations? Interactions… etc?

## Research aims

The Burgundy truffle is an abundant ectomycorrhizal symbiont that occurs
in a wide range of temperate climates. Despite its prized underground
ascocarps, its complex lifecycle and possible response to anthropogenic
climate change are largely known. A citizen science monitoring of
Burgundy truffle ascocarp production was run with a 3-week resolution in
23 natural populations at the center of its European distribution over
up to 11 years. More than 3000 truffles were genotyped using
microsatellite markers to assess the genetic structure and diversity of
these populations in space and time. The aims of this research project
are to assess the population structure, compare intra- and inter
populations and assess the gene flow and perenniality of individuals.

## A review of the current state of research

### Truffles in general

Truffles are edible ectomycorrhizal fungi belonging to the phylum
Ascomycota and genus *Tuber P. Micheli* ex F. H. Wigg. and living in
symbiosis with different host trees. They produce subterraneous
fruitbodies (i.e. ascocarps or sporocarps) known as truffles.

True truffles are fungi belonging to the genus Tuber, whose species form
symbiotic associations with roots of a wide range of ectomycorrhizal
tree species (Benucci et al., 2011; Stobbe et al., 2012).

As ectomycorrhizal fungi, truffles grant their hosts access to water and
nutrients, protect roots from pest and disease, and interact with and
sometimes kill understory, non-­host plants (Gryndler et al., 2014;
Streiblová et al., 2012; Taschen et al., 2020).

With an ever-growing number of newly described truffle diversity (Tuber,
Tuberaceae) from around the world that is clearly exceeding 200 species
(Bonito et al., 2013; Guevara et al., 2013; Reyna and Garcia-Barreda,
2014; Berch and Bonito, 2016; Suwannarach et al., 2017; Wan et al.,
2017; Arthur et al., 2018; Eberhart et al., 2020), only about a dozen of
them are of commercial importance (Boa, 2004; Bonito et al., 2010;
Chevalier and Frochot, 2002; Hall et al., 2003).

True truffles are ectomycorrhizal fungi belonging to the genus Tuber in
Ascomycetes. This genus, which exclusively forms hypogeous fruiting
bodies, comprises more than 200 species all over the world (Bonito et
al. 2013; Bonito et al. 2010), of which at least 30 naturally occur in
Europe (Ceruti et al. 2003). Some of these species are well known for
their organoleptic properties and their high economic value, such as
Tuber magnatum (Alba white truffle), Tuber melanosporum (Périgord black
truffle), and Tuber aestivum Vittad. (Burgundy and summer truffles,
depending on the harvesting period).

Truffle species include the most valuable fungi on earth due to their
use in haute cuisine (Reyna & Garcia-­Barreda, 2014).

More than 100 Tuber species exist in the world but only a few, such as
*T. magnatum Picco*, *T. melanosporum* Vittad., and *T. aestivum*
Vittad., have interesting organoleptic qualities. The first two species
have a natural distribution restricted to limited European countries,
but *T. aestivum* has a natural distribution across Europe (Virginie
Molinier et al. 2013).

Truffles are ectomycorrhizal fungi of the phylum Ascomycota and Recent
advancements in molecular biology have contributed to a better
understanding of evolutionary origins, population dynamics and symbiotic
relations of different truffle species (Martin et al., 2010; Murat and
Martin, 2016).

In contrast to other high-value forest mushrooms, such as Boletus spp.,
Cantharellus spp. and Laccaria spp., which can develop their fruitbodies
during a few days (Moore et al., 2008; Halbwachs et al., 2016),
hypogenous truffle fruitbodies are expected to grow more slowly (Callot,
1999; Olivier et al., 2012; Zarivi et al., 2015). However, it is still
unknown how much time truffles need to develop and how many generations
of fruitbodies can occur within one ‘growing’ season between the
formation of primordia and the realisation of a fully mature and ripe
gleba (Büntgen et al., 2017). The species’ subterranean life cycle
dynamics, together with complex host interactions and the lack of
non-destructive investigation techniques (Luoma et al., 1991), are the
main reasons for the yet little understood biotic and abiotic drivers of
truffle growth (Pacioni et al., 2014). Localising truffles in situ is
only possible with the help of well-trained sniffing dogs or, very
rarely, with domestic trufflepigs (or occasionally also by searching and
flowing truffle-specific flies, such as Suillia tuberiperda), which all
have the olfactory sense capable of detecting the volatile aroma of
fruitbodies from a distance of up to 50 m (Olivier et al., 2012;
Splivallo et al., 2011; Splivallo and Cullere, 2016). Consequently, our
knowledge about the truffles’ hidden belowground mode of life is
restricted to only those fruitbodies that were detected (Trappe and
Claridge, 2010). In fact, we simply do not know how selective a harvest
is and how well it represents the actual abundance of fruitbodies e the
absence of evidence is no evidence of absence. Non-systematic and
nondestructive harvests are therefore likely dominated by specific aroma
concentrations, fruitbody dimensions and locations, as well as
hunter/dog ability. The aroma profile of truffles seems to be influenced
by individual genotypes (Molinier et al., 2015), and not by the
geographical origin or maturity level (Niimi et al., 2021). Since the
development of aromas most likely depends on the presence of specific
bacteria (Splivallo and Cullere, 2016), no correlation between gleba
colour and aroma intensity has been reported. Depending on the
percentage of fully pigmented spores, and thus the level of maturity and
ripening (Molinier et al., 2016b), the gleba of Burgundy truffles can
vary from white-ochre to dark brown. Differences in the colour and
texture of fruitbodies have been proofed useful visual criteria for
species identification and distinction (Chatin, 1887), which may
otherwise be considered genetically identical, such as Tuber. aestivum
and Tuber uncinatum (Molinier et al., 2013). (Büntgen et al. (2021)).

Much remains unknown about the life history of these iconic species due
to a lack of available data from natural truffle populations. However,
available data on black truffle production in Spain, Italy, and France
suggest that truffle species may be vulnerable to global climate change
(Baragatti et al., 2019; Büntgen et al., 2011, 2012). The black Périgord
truffle (T. melanosporum Vittad.) is known to be on the decline in its
natural range. During the golden age of Périgord truffle production in
the 19th century, France produced up to 1588 tons year−1 of commercial
T. melanosporum. Today, the same regions produce 10–­50 tons year−1
(productivity data from Baragatti et al. (2019), Reyna-­Domenech and
García-­Barreda (2009)). Although wars and economy account for a
substantial part of these declines, they do not tell the whole story.
Declines in Mediterranean harvests in France and Italy from 1970 to 2006
are best predicted by a trend of hotter, drier summers (Büntgen et al.,
2011, 2012). Existing Périgord truffle habitat is becoming unsuitable,
consistent with the climate envelope migrating northwards from the
Mediterranean area to Central Europe (Čejka et al., 2020). Similar data
on fruitbody production are unavailable for the congeneric Summer
truffle (Tuber aestivum Vittad. Syn. Tuber uncinatum Chatin). Summer
truffle populations are substantially more widely distributed than
Mediterranean Périgord truffles, producing fruitbodies in tree stands
ranging from the hot, dry climates of Spain to the cold, temperate
climates of Scandinavia (Molinier, Peter, et al., 2016; Stobbe et al.,
2012, 2013). Together with its broad ecological niche, the Summer
truffle’s long fruitbody production period and high market value make it
attractive for cultivation and wild harvesting (Stobbe et al., 2013)
Steidinger et al. (2022)

### T. aestivum

T. aestivum is indigenous to many European countries and, unlike the
other two species, has a widespread distribution range from Sweden to
Spain (Stobbe et al 2013a). T. aestivum has also been found outside
Europe in North Africa (Jeandroz et al. 2008). Since the 1970s, T.
aestivum as well as some other truffle species have been successfully
cultivated in truffle orchards (Chevalier et al. 1973). To date, most
studies have focused on the species’ taxonomic status (Mello et al.
2002;Molinier et al. 2013b;Paolocci etal. 2004;896 Mycorrhiza (2016)
26:895–907 Weden et al. 2005), aroma profiles (Cullere et al. 2010;Diaz
et al. 2009; Splivallo et al. 2012) and genetic diversity (Molinier et
al. 2015b) including potential links to aroma (Splivallo et al.,
2012;Molinier etal. 2015a). The cultivation potential and requirements
of these species (Benucci et al. 2012; Shamekh et al. 2014; Stobbe et
al. 2013a;Stobbe et al. 2013b), including soil conditions (Benucci et
al. 2011; Gryndler et al. 2011; Salerni et al. 2014), have also been
investigated previously. However, the small scale genetic structure and
the distribution of the mating-type strains of T. aestivum remain
largely unknown. The genome sequencing of T. melanosporum in 2010
(Martin et al. 2010), as well as numerous other studies of T.
melanosporum (Murat et al., 2013; Riccioni et al. 2008; Rubini et al.
2005, 2011a, b), T. magnatum (Paolocci et al. 2006;Riccioni et al.
2008;Rubinietal. 2005, 2011a,b) and T. indicum (Belfiori et al. 2013)
haverevealedthatthese species are heterothallic, as has lately been
confirmed for T. aestivum (Payen et al. 2014). While homothallic species
present both mating types (MAT) in a single genome, rendering them
self-fertile, heterothallic species bear only one ofthe two idiomorphs
in the MAT locus (Billiard et al. 2012). The same haploid mycelium can
produce male (antheridia) and female (ascogonia) organs, although these
structures have hardly been observed in Tuber species (Le Tacon et al.
2015). To achieve its life cycle, an ascogonium has to be fertilized by
a strain of the opposite mating type. In truffles, a fruiting body is
composed of peridium, gleba and ascospores. The gleba is a haploid
tissue consisting ofthe maternal parent genotype, which is usually also
found as mycelia in the surrounding soil and on nearby ECM root tips
(Murat et al. 2013; Rubini et al. 2011a). In contrast, ascospores
originate from the recombination of the maternal and paternal genotypes
(Le Tacon et al. 2015). Since Tuber spp. are hypogeous, their
propagation mainly depends on insects and larger animals as spore
vectors (Trappe and Claridge 2005). Hypogeous species are thought to
have a shorter distance dispersion potential than epigeous species,
which have air-dispersed spores, with related effects on the gene flow
and genetic structure. The consequence of a short dispersal distance is
greater population differentiation and isolation by distance at smaller
spatial scales for hypogeous fungi such as Rhizopogon occidentalis, R.
vulgaris and Tuber melanosporum (Murat et al. 2013;Grubisha etal. 2007).
A fine-scale population structure analysis carried out in two T.
melanosporum plantations using fruiting bodies and mycorrhizas
demonstrated a profound isolation by distance in the first 5 m and found
that belowground genets had a maximum size ofa fewmeters (Murat et al.
2013). The observed patterns were assumed to be a combination of
vegetative mycelial growth of a few genets that persisted for several
years and an annual recruitment of new genets via the ascospores.
Intriguingly, genotypes were not spatially randomly distributed in T.
melanosporum plantations and natural fields but rather occurred in
clusters according to their MAT idiomorph (Murat et al. 2013;Rubini
etal. 2011a). Such a spatial segregation ofmating types would decrease
the probability that compatible cells meet, which could be beneficial
under the assumption that sex is costly (Selosse et al. 2013). This
segregation ofthe mating-type strains raises the question ofwhere
paternal individuals come from and what structures they might consist of
(Le Tacon et al., 2015). Virginie Molinier et al. (2016)

Sequencing of the T. aestivum genome is currently being completed (Payen
et al., 2014), and the first sequences have facilitated the development
ofspecific simple sequence repeat markers (SSR) (Molinier et al. 2013a).
A first assessment of the species’ genetic structure at the
European-scale revealed the existence ofwell-differentiated sympatric
genetic groups, indicating different ecotypes (defined as genetically
distinct varieties within a species that are adapted to specific
environmental conditions) with reduced gene flow, although this previous
study provided no clues about how these ecotypes are spatially
distributed (Molinier et al. 2015b). At much smaller scales, a recent
study that focused on the link between genetic structure and aroma in an
orchard naturally colonized by T. aestivum indicated that genet sizes
(up to 92 m) are larger than those of T. melanosporum (Molinier et al.
2015a;Murat et al. 2013). However, the limited sample size did not allow
any deep genetic structure analyses, and the mating-type genotype
distribution was not considered. Virginie Molinier et al. (2016)

The popularity of truffles as an exclusive ingredient of elite
gastronomy has risen tremendously in recent years (Hall et al., 2003).
Not only the highly prized Alba white truffle(Tuber magnatum), and the
Perigord black truffle(Tuber melanosporum), but also the more common
Burgundy truffle(Tuber aestivum) are coveted. In contrast to T. magnatum
and T. melanosporum, which are native to Mediterranean environments
(Chevalier and Sourzat, 2012; Vasquez et al., 2014), T. aestivum is
distributed across large parts of temperate Europe (Chevalier, 2010;
Stobbe et al., 2012). According to Hall et al. (2003, 2007) this truffle
species is the most common edible fungus in Europe. Based on inventories
of hypogeous fungi in the region of Basel, Switzerland, it has even been
estimated to be among the most abundant mushroom species in mixed beech
forests on calcareous soils (Schw€arzel, 1967). Nevertheless, T.
aestivum has only been sparsely harvested in many countries, and is even
legally protected from harvest in Germany for its alleged rarity (Stobbe
et al., 2013a). This discrepancy in the estimation of its abundance is
due to the fragmentary knowledge about the species’ occurrence and
distribution, which, in turn, is related to its hidden life belowground
and the difficulty ofdetecting its hypogeous fruit bodies. The great
demand for T. aestivum has increased cultivation attempts of this
symbiotic ascomycete fungus (Murat, 2015). Although truffle plantations
are now established over much of the species’ natural distribution range
(Stobbe et al., 2013a), setting up new plantations is costly and
investments have to be made on a long-term horizon since growth of
truffle mycelium in soil is slow (Molinier et al., 2016) and harvests
can begin no earlier than 5 y after the initial inoculation of host
seedlings, reaching their maximum about a decade after planting (Callot,
1999). Like many other truffle species, T. aestivum grows predominantly
in soils with a high content of limestone or exchangeable calcium
(Chevalier and Sourzat, 2012) and forms ectomycorrhizas with a wide
range of tree and shrub species (Stobbe et al., 2012, 2013a). However,
the existence of so called ‘brûles’, i.e. areas with severely reduced
plant cover in the vicinity of colonised trees, which are a result of
allelopathic compounds released by T. aestivum soil mycelium (Streiblova
et al., 2012), indicate that the relationship of this truffle species
with vegetation is not always mutualistic. Such multifaceted
interactions of T. aestivum with surrounding vegetation need
clarification to better understand the ecological requirements and
potential habitat of T. aestivum. Such knowledge would further ease the
search for suitable cultivation sites and might even improve their
productivity (De Miguel et al., 2014). Moser et al. (2017)

### Results from WSL

Previous studies utilizing random-amplifi ed polymorphic DNA (RAPD) or
intersimple sequence repeat (ISSR) markers and sequencing of a few genes
suggested the existence of genetic diversity between *T. aestivum*
populations ( Gandeboeuf et al., 1997 ; Mello et al., 2002 ; Weden et
al., 2004 ). Direct shotgun pyrosequencing (DSP) has been successfully
used for the identification of microsatellites in animals or plants but,
to our knowledge, this approach has never been used for ectomycorrhizal
fungi. Recently the sequencing of the black truffle genome revealed a
substantial richness in repeated sequences such as microsatellites (
Murat et al., 2011 ). This result suggested that a DSP approach could be
used for identifying microsatellites in Tuber species. The aim of our
study was therefore to use DSP to identify, for the fi rst time,
polymorphic microsatellites in the economically important truffle *T.
aestivum* (Virginie Molinier et al. (2013)).

Among Tuber species, Tuber aestivum Vittad. has a wide distributional
range being found naturally all over Europe. Here, we performed
large-scale population genetic analyses in T. aestivum to (i)
investigate its genetic diversity at the European scale, (ii)
characterize its genetic structure and test for the presence of ecotypes
and (iii) shed light into its demographic history. To reach these goals,
230 ascocarps from different populations were genotyped using 15
polymorphic simple sequence repeat markers. We identified 181 multilocus
genotypes and four genetic groups which did not show a clear
geographical separation; although, one of them was present exclusively
in Southeast France, Italy and Spain. Fixation index values between
pairs ofgenetic groups were generally high and ranged from 0.29 to 0.45.
A significant deficit ofheterozygosity indicated a population expansion
instead of a recent population bottleneck, suggesting that T. aestivum
is not endangered in Europe, not even in Mediterranean regions. Our
study based on a large-scale population genetic analysis suggests that
genetically distinct populations and likely ecotypes within T. aestivum
are present. In turn, this study paves the way to future investigations
aimed at addressing the biological and/or ecological factors that have
concurred in shaping the population genetic structure of this species.
Present results should also have implications for the truffle market
since defining genetic markers are now possible at least for some
specific T. aestivum genetic groups. Virgine Molinier et al. (2016)

Here, we introduce a novel eco-archaeological approach to study in situ
aspects ofsubterranean life cycle dynamics and genetic structures ofthe
Burgundy truffle in three different natural habitats in
Baden-Württemberg, southern Germany. We apply a suite of fine-scale
excavation techniques to reveal high-resolution, spatiotemporal
snapshots of the composition, size and developmental stage of a
wide-range of individual truffles. Our approach not only exposes
fruitbodies in the investigated soil layers, but also relates each of
them to its edaphic environment, and further describes the obtained
genotype composition. Finally, we outline innovative pathways of
cross-disciplinary research to help truffle hunters and farmers to
improve their harvest practices and management strategies. (Büntgen et
al. (2021)).

Here we present 8 years (2011–­2018) of citizen science monitoring data
on the fruitbody production of naturally occurring T. aestivum
populations. Using machine learning, we modeled how truffle productivity
is influenced by soil physicochemical, fungal meta-­community, climate,
and host tree phenology. Additionally, we characterized the broad
species climatic envelope of European summer truffles. By comparing the
sensitivity of summer truffle fruitbody productivity to interannual
climate trends, we test whether these center-­of-­range, keystone
populations are locally sensitized to climate change. Steidinger et al.
(2022).

Although the Burgundy truffle (Tuber aestivum)is an ectomycorrhizal
fungus of important economic value, its subterranean life cycle and
population biology are still poorly understood. Here, we determine
mating type and simple sequence repeat (SSR) maternal genotypes of
mapped fruiting bodies to assess their genetic structure within two
naturally colonized forest sites in southern Germany. Forty-one
genotypes were identified from 112 fruiting bodies. According to their
mating types, the maternal genotypes were aggregated only in one
population. Genotypic diversity ofindividuals that mostly were small and
occurred in 1 out of2 years ofsampling was high. Although these results
suggested a ruderal colonization strategy, some genets spread several
hundred meters. This result indicates that, besides sexual spore
dispersal, vegetative growth or spreading by mycelial propagules
contributes to dissemination. In one site, fewer individuals with a
tendency to expand genets belonging to only one genetic group were
observed. In the second site, numerous small individuals were found and
were grouped into two clearly differentiated genetic groups that were
spatially intermingled. Forest characteristics and disturbances are
possible reasons for the observed genetic patterns. Our findings
contribute to a better understanding ofthe biology ofone ofthe most
widespread and commercially important truffle species. This knowledge is
critical for establishing and maintaining sustainable long-term truffle
cultivations. Virginie Molinier et al. (2016)

Here, we aim at estimating the potential of using vegetation composition
as an additional parameter to detect and describe T. aestivum habitats,
and subsequently use this information to define suitable cultivation
sites. We, therefore, assess the abundance of individual plant species
at 16 sites with knownT. aestivum occurrences in southern Germany and
Switzerland. We compare the floristic composition of these sites with
that of a systematic sample of 232 Swiss F. sylvatica, Carpinus betulus
and Ostrya carpinifolia (FCO) forest sites with a climate that is,
according to current knowledge, favourable for T. aestivum. Moser et al.
(2017)

## Identification of gaps in the field of research, motivation for the research and justification of the added scientific value for the field of study

However, many aspects of the subterranean life cycle of the genus, such
as the formation, duration, maturation and deterioration of their
fruitbodies, remain enigmatic and require innovative scientific
endeavours (Büntgen and Egli, 2014; Büntgen et al., 2017).
Interdisciplinary and international research projects are now indicating
that Burgundy truffles (Tuber aestivum) are more widely distributed in
ecologically suitable habitats across central Europe than previously
recognised (Stobbe et al., 2012; Molinier et al., 2016c; Cejka et al.,
2020; Puliga et al., 2021).

## Materials and Methods

- describe data collection

  We selected a total of 20 natural T. aestivum populations from within
  the center of its known natural geographic distribution to monitor
  truffle fruitbody production (Figure 2a). These populations were
  defined as spatially restricted locations of known truffle occurrences
  ranging in size from 20 to 1000 m2, depending on the contiguous area
  under compatible host trees where trained truffle dogs found T.
  aestivum fruitbodies. Monitoring occurred every 3 weeks throughout the
  whole year by citizen scientists using dogs trained to scent summer
  truffles (see Table 1 for the years where monitoring data are
  available for each site). At each site, only one and the same
  citizen-­dog team performed the monitoring throughout the whole
  project. For all belowground fruitbodies detected by the truffle dogs,
  the soil was roughly removed and the species identity, mass (g), and
  degree of maturity were assessed. The degrees of maturity were divided
  into the following qualitative categories:

1.  unripe: white, hard, no or indistinct odor 2. semi ripe: light
    beige-­light brown, hard, indistinct (nutty) odor 3. ripe: brown to
    dark brown, hard, intense odor (Steidinger et al. (2022))

- describe molecular preparation

Genomic DNA ofthe fruiting bodies was isolated from gleba of each sample
using DNeasy® Plant Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Extracts were eluted in 50 μl ofBuffer AE
supplied as part of the kit. To identify the mating type of each
fruiting body, specific primer pairs were designed for each MAT
idiomorph based on T. aestivum genome sequences (Accession numbers:
LT593973 TuaestMAT1-1 gene (European Nucleotide Archive); JB402662.1
TuaestMAT1-2 gene (Genbank)); aest-MAT1-1f (5′ CTACATTCTGGTGG GCGATT
3′)/aest-MAT1-1r (5′ TCCCGATTTGTCCA ACGTAT 3′) and aest-MAT1-2f (5′
ATCGTCGGGACTCA TCTCAC 3′)/aest-MAT1-2r (5′ CGGATATTGGGATT TGATGG 3′).
For mating-type gene amplification, multiplex PCRs were performed in a
total volume of25 μl consisting of 2.5 μl of 10× REDTaq PCR Buffer (11
mM MgCl2;Sigma: B5926), 5 μl dNTP, (1mM, Life Technologies), 1 μl
multiplex solution containing the four primers (10 μMeach), 1.25 μl RED
Taq Polymerase, (1 U/μl, Sigma: D4309), 13.25 μlof sterile water and 2
μl template DNA diluted 10 times. The PCR reactions were performed in a
Veriti® thermal cycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) with
the following conditions: 2 min at 94 °C followed by 28 cycles of
denaturation at 94 °C for 30 s, annealing at 57 °C for 30 s, extension
at 72 °C for 1 min, and a final extension at 72 °C for 7 min. PCR
products were run on 1.5 % agarose gel and visualized with a UV
transilluminator after ethidium bromide staining. The extracted DNA from
fruiting bodies was amplified using a set of 14 SSR loci (aest01,
aest06, aest07, aest10, aest15, aest18, aest24, aest25, aest26, aest28,
aest29, aest31, aest35 and aest36) developed previously by Molinier et
al. (2013a). Polymerase chain reactions were carried out using the
Qiagen Multiplex PCR kit (Qiagen, Germany) following the manufacturer’s
instructions. PCRs were performed in a total volume of 7 μl, consisting
of 3.5 μlof Qiagen Multiplex Buffer (2×), 1.8 μl of sterile water, 0.7
μlprimer premix (2 μM) and 1 μl template DNA diluted 10 times. Two
different primer premixes were used according to the expected allelic
sizes to avoid overlapping. Both multiplex mixtures had the same PCR
conditions: samples were denatured at 95 °C for 15 min, followed by 28
cycles consisting ofa denaturing step at 94 °C for 30 s, an annealing
step at 60 °C for 1 min and an extension step at 72 °C for 1 min. A
final extension step at 60 °C for 30 min was added after 28 cycles. For
the subsequent genotyping step on ABI-3130 (Applied Biosystems, USA),
PCR products were diluted in pure water (1/4) and then mixed with HiDi
Formamide. As an internal size standard, GeneScan™ 500 LIZ™ dye Size
Standard (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) was used. Virginie Molinier et
al. (2016)

- describe genetic analyses

Identification ofrepeated multilocus genotypes A multilocus genotype
(MLG) was assigned to each fruiting body. To distinguish true clones
from samples carrying the same MLG by chance, the probability that
copies of a MLG arose from sexual reproduction (Psex) was calculated
using MLGSIM (Stenberg et al. 2003). Psex values were generated by
10,000 simulations using a Monte Carlo simulation method. A significant
Psex value suggests that multiple copies of the same MLG arose from
asexual reproduction and growth (true clones). In contrast, a
non-significant Psex value suggests that the number ofoccurrences
observed for a repeated MLG resulted from sexual reproduction (by
chance). In the latter case, the occurrences were treated as different
individuals. The number of MLGs and genotypic diversity, as well as
versus the number of loci, were calculated for one member ofeach MLG
using Multilocus 1.3 (Agapow and Burt 2001). Given the clonality
observed, subsequent analyses were conducted on a global data set
including all individuals (ramet level) and on a clone-corrected data
set including one member ofeach MLG (simple clone-corrected dataset).
For some spatial analyses (i.e. aggregation index, autocorrelation
analyses), we assigned up to four centred location points per MLG for
large MLGs (\>15 m) in the clone-corrected data set (partial
clone-corrected dataset) (Fig. S2). Virginie Molinier et al. (2016)

## Expected results

## Risk assessment

## Project schedule

- Data collection almost finished
- Data analysis: splitting into different parts

## Budget plan

- Costs: personnel, analyses

## References

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
entry-spacing="0">

<div id="ref-buntgenEcoarchaeologicalExcavationTechniques2021"
class="csl-entry">

Büntgen, Ulf, Martina Peter, Willy Tegel, Ulrich Stobbe, Rengert Elburg,
Ludger Sproll, Virginie Molinier, Tomáš Čejka, Elizabeth L. Isaac, and
Simon Egli. 2021. “Eco-Archaeological Excavation Techniques Reveal
Snapshots of Subterranean Truffle Growth.” *Fungal Biology* 125 (12):
951–61. <https://doi.org/10.1016/j.funbio.2021.09.001>.

</div>

<div id="ref-molinierSSRbasedIdentificationGenetic2016"
class="csl-entry">

Molinier, Virgine, Claude Murat, Martina Peter, Armelle Gollotte,
Herminia De la Varga, Barbara Meier, Simon Egli, Beatrice Belfiori,
Francesco Paolocci, and Daniel Wipf. 2016. “SSR-Based Identification of
Genetic Groups Within European Populations of *Tuber Aestivum* Vittad.”
*Mycorrhiza*, 99–110. <https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-015-0649-0>.

</div>

<div id="ref-molinierFinescaleGeneticStructure2016" class="csl-entry">

Molinier, Virginie, Claude Murat, Andri Baltensweiler, Ulf Büntgen,
Francis Martin, Barbara Meier, Barbara Moser, et al. 2016. “Fine-scale
genetic structure of natural Tuber aestivum sites in southern Germany.”
*Mycorrhiza* 26 (8): 895–907.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s00572-016-0719-y>.

</div>

<div id="ref-molinierFirstIdentificationPolymorphic2013"
class="csl-entry">

Molinier, Virginie, Claude Murat, Emmanuelle Morin, Armelle Gollotte,
Daniel Wipf, and Francis Martin. 2013. “First Identification of
Polymorphic Microsatellite Markers in the Burgundy Truffle, *Tuber
Aestivum* (Tuberaceae)1.” *Applications in Plant Sciences* 1 (2):
apps.1200220. <https://doi.org/10.3732/apps.1200220>.

</div>

<div id="ref-moserEcologicalIndicatorsTuber2017" class="csl-entry">

Moser, Barbara, Ulf Büntgen, Virginie Molinier, Martina Peter, Ludger
Sproll, Ulrich Stobbe, Willy Tegel, and Simon Egli. 2017. “Ecological
Indicators of *Tuber Aestivum* Habitats in Temperate European Beech
Forests.” *Fungal Ecology* 29 (October): 59–66.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.funeco.2017.06.002>.

</div>

<div id="ref-steidingerFallSummerTruffle2022" class="csl-entry">

Steidinger, Brian S., Ulf Büntgen, Uli Stobbe, Willy Tegel, Ludger
Sproll, Matthias Haeni, Barbara Moser, et al. 2022. “The Fall of the
Summer Truffle: Recurring Hot, Dry Summers Result in Declining Fruitbody
Production of Tuber Aestivum in Central Europe.” *Global Change Biology*
28 (24): 7376–90. <https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.16424>.

</div>

</div>
